Reading Inquiry -- Week 3

During the week 3 readings, I learned how spatial and temporal
competition among species and individuals can be employed by designers
to create dynamic, sustainable, and more expressive garden communities.
Five specific things that I have learned this week include:

-   That how and where plants grow (spatial structure) and thrive is a
    complex adaptive system influenced by various variables including
    microsite climatic conditions, inter/intra-species phytohormonal
    feedbacks, and competition among individuals.
-   That in natural plant populations, individuals are genetically
    diverse even among species that spread clonally or produce
    genetically similar offspring.
-   That competition between individuals can be harnessed to induce
    competitive exclusion against unwanted species. It is possible to
    prevent unwanted species such as English Ivy from spreading into a
    designed area by planting more desirable species that consume the
    same resources and occupy the same niche. This can help reduce the
    time and effort required to maintain a landscape.
-   That communities are affected by present competition as well as past
    competition. The concept of regeneration niches states that whenever
    one plant dies, another plant will take its place. This new plant
    might not necessarily be of the same species as the one it replaces.
    This regeneration is affected by a multitude of conditions -- many
    of which have been influenced by the plants that lived before and
    the conditions that they were under.
-   That landscapes should be allowed to be dynamic and to vary in size,
    structure, and composition. In other words, populations should be
    allowed to change over time. This helps to create a feeling of
    place, increases diversity, and leads towards more resilient
    populations appropriate for the temporal and physical environment of
    the design.

I found these five concepts interesting. Together, they form a paradigm
that shifts the design of garden communities (including the urban
forest) from being static and expensive to maintain towards being
dynamic and auto-regulating (Pennisi, 2020). This shift away from
traditional gardening is beneficial as the health benefits that parks,
and green spaces provide are greater in poor areas. In poor communities,
municipal resources are likely to be already spread thin due to lower
property taxes. The required maintenance of gardens and parks can take
away resources from other critical services such as schools (Semuels,
2016). Under traditional gardening, annuals and short-lived perennials
are some of the most common underbrush vegetation. When an individual
dies, an opportunistic, wild, and unwanted species often grows in its
place during the spring (Lovejoy, 2014). The large number of factors
influencing whether an individual plant will thrive or perish heavily
fluctuates over time. Gardeners must constantly remove weeds and replace
plants. Under self-regulating designs, high levels of genetic and
species diversity can ensure that desired species are always available
to fill in gaps as they open under a wide range of conditions (Beck,
2013, Chapter 2). Plants that successfully compete for resources and
propagate are often better suited for the local site's climate and soil
conditions (Beck, 2013, Chapter 3). Unlike the creation of cultivars
(such as described in the "The Schenley Park Tree Research Grove"
reading), however, genetic diversity is maintained among individuals and
in seeds stored in the soil. Biodiversity helps to decreases the risk of
garden susceptibility towards disease and pests.

While self-sustaining gardens are cost-effective in Canada and the
United States where wages associated with labor are high, the initial
costs to design a garden ecosystem that mimics the structure of natural
communities are higher than traditional garden designs. In places where
labor is cheap, cost-benefit analysis may reveal that it doesn't make as
much sense for individuals and municipalities to invest resources into
reducing the amount of work required for maintenance. Traditional
gardens often provide extensive employment for less-skilled and
less-educated workers in impoverished areas such as the Eastern Cape
Towns of South Africa who would otherwise remain unemployed (King &
Shackleton, 2020, 2021). While morally acceptable in developed nations
where alternative employment is widely available, reducing the number of
low-skilled gardeners could arguably be considered unethical in
developing nations with poor economies where work is already in short
supply.

Critical Comment

With the week three readings, I've come to wonder how dynamic garden
landscapes can be better popularized among popular fashion and opinion.
Throughout high school, I worked for a couple of different landscaping
companies. Each company I worked for was relatively dismissive of
non-traditionally structured gardens. The common claim was that they
were not as attractive as static landscapes (possibly because the
companies wanted to remain in business, but ignorance and lack of formal
education also likely play a role). While the readings have helped me
apply knowledge from past courses to an alternative landscape design
paradigm. I feel that unless this information gets spread into the
industry and popular imagination, there is likely to be resistance to
the widespread city-level adoption of diversity and competition into our
gardens, parks, and landscapes. Public outreach may take the form of
gardening seminars, pamphlets, and fliers, but I'm not sure how
effective these mediums can be. My question for this reading inquiry,
and what I'll be doing further reading on, is how to better reach and
educate the public towards better, more sustainable urban forest
practices such as those mentioned in this week's readings.    

Bibliography

Beck, T. (2013). Principles of Ecological Landscape Design. Island
Press.

King, A., & Shackleton, C. M. (2020). Maintenance of public and private
urban green infrastructure provides significant employment in Eastern
Cape towns, South Africa. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 54, 126740.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2020.126740

King, A., & Shackleton, C. M. (2021). Working in poverty: Informal
employment of household gardeners in Eastern Cape towns, South Africa.
Development Southern Africa, 0(0), 1--14.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0376835X.2021.1940867

Lovejoy, A. (2014, April 25). Creating a Low-Maintenance Garden.
FineGardening.
https://www.finegardening.com/article/creating-a-low-maintenance-garden

Pennisi, B. (2020). Care of Ornamental Plants in the Landscape \| UGA
Cooperative Extension. University of Georgia Extension.
https://extension.uga.edu/publications/detail.html?number=B1065&title=Care%20of%20Ornamental%20Plants%20in%20the%20Landscape

Semuels, A. (2016, August 25). Good School, Rich School; Bad School,
Poor School. The Atlantic.
https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2016/08/property-taxes-and-unequal-schools/497333/

 
